And I'm preparing this for the Science Fiction Oral History Association. Of
course, the oral history tapes on old times are important. But tomorrow morning,
the events of today will be history. I still recall in 1920, when I was in the
fifth grade, the feeling of wonder and shock with which we learned that the
eighth graders upstairs were studying World War II from their history books. How
could something we had just lived through be history? And I understand that
there are people today feeling the same shock at finding that the 60s are any
story of this. Well, out of the wisdom thus learned, I wish to give you this
cassette of thoughts and statements of very recently. Mostly they are thoughts I
presented at meetings of the Little Men's, which is to say the elves, gnomes,
leprechauns, and little men's chowder, marching, and science fiction society,
the source of the Invisible Little Men Award. The organization was named after
the social club to which belonged Mr. O'Malley, Barnaby's fairy godfather, in
the comic strip by Cockett Johnson in the days between World War II and
McCarthyism. It ended then because Johnson was reported to have had a communist
class. In the earliest days, the little man published the Rotomagnetic Digest,
of which, I have been told, at least one complete set was still extant as
recently as a year or two ago. But I wasn't one of the little men at that time.
These thoughts are much more recent. There was the time, for instance, that I
reviewed Poul Anderson's Home Brew, a collection of excellent short pieces of
which perhaps the most brilliant is Uncleavie's True Thinking, in which he
translates atomic theory into English. I had occasion to comment on his
characterization of fascism on page 28 of the book. I noted that anyone living
today should know that the packaging is not the contents and that the sales
pitch is not the product. Furthermore, we do know what fascism is. Just as
communism as attempts of people living under fewer regimes to move towards
democracy and industrialization, fascism is an effort to stop a people's moves
into democracy and to move them back to a medieval society. Of course, neither
effort can be fully successful. Shortly after reviewing the book The Early Long,
I had occasion to mention my earliest memory of a work by C. L. Moore. Since
much of The Earliest Long and The Earliest More both appeared in Weird Tales,
this was entirely appropriate.
Those of you who have read The Early Long may remember that the earliest long
was fairly representative of the usual contents of weird tales. No evoking of
weirdness or horror, just an assertion of it. No real description, just an
assertion of indescribableness. A heavy reliance on slime and filth and stench
and immobilization. The murkiest of background hidden with the murkiest of
prose. But don't get the idea that all of it was like that. There was some
action prose and some true description. For me, the high point of that came in
September of 1934. The East Bay Scientific Association was the local branch of
the World Fan Organization, the International Scientific Association. We met at
Aubrey McDermott's house that month, in fact, most months. My copy of Weird
Tales hadn't come yet, but Aubrey's had. He handed it to me, opened, and said,
Read that story. So I read it to him. It was so perfectly written that it simply
flowed with no effort on my part. it was a beautifully clean prose everything
was simply told clear and clean description just told what happened what the
characters did and said and what happened to them and how they destroyed each
other it was a tale of how a defeated warrior woman escaped from the dungeon of
her conquered castle went down a hole in its lowest level and found there a
world with a power which she came back and used when i finished the members
thought i had been rehearsing to read it so well but i'd never seen it before it
was simply that good a job of writing the writer was C. O. Moore the story was the
black god's kiss it's now in print in the best of C. O. Moore another note i found
in my archives is undated and also takes off from a passage written by Poul i
probably never before mentioned it to anyone but because i have used it to
comment on the nature of science fiction it's worth recording.
Poul writes that it has been said that those who do not learn history must repeat it.
Ben Bova in another magazine published a little sooner, wrote that, to paraphrase Santayana,
those who ignore the lessons of history are doomed to repeat the mistakes.
I remember both endings.
The both of my versions say that those who do not or was it refused to learn from history
are condemned to, et cetera.
There is considerable difference of content here. It makes little
difference whether we must or are condemned or are doomed, but it matters much
whether we need to learn history or to learn from it, and whether history has
lessons we must learn or simply contents from which we must draw our own
learnings. Another instructor in my department has been known to ask his student
why truth is better told by myths than by factual instruction, and this has
relevance here. It is noteworthy that the truths learned from history are never
embodied in our histories, but in our mythologies, which often then are
reabsorbed into the histories in forms designed not to purvey but to hide the
truth. However, my colleague's point has relevance here, although I do not know
that he would share the truth as I see it. Poul, for instance, often does not.
The relevance lies in the essence of the difference between fact and truth. A
fact is an idea or an understanding which corresponds to reality in the outside
world. Truth is that which corresponds to our own conceptions of the universe.
This is the appeal science fiction has for many of us, and also why many people
find it weird. Often they prefer out-and-out fantasy, such as in normal
mainstream fiction, which accords with the truths that normal zombies of our
culture are supposed to accept. Even they know it to be unreal and escapist. And
science fiction is no less so but at least we don't try to pretend it's real.
Then we can use it to convey truths as well as to hide through facts. As Randall
Garrett maintained that a past fan can mention at San Francisco Airport science
fiction and mythologies have much in common. Back in February 1976 I did a
review of another of Poul's books so I might as well throw it in at this point.
Those of you, I told the little men, who are in the science fiction book club
will already have read The Winter of the World. It's a good adventure story, with
a certain amount of intrigue more suggested than actually described, and because
Poul is one of the more thoughtful authors, a lot of stinking do is on. In this
book, most of it's in italics, so if you want to, you can skip that, but I warn
you, if you do, you'll miss a lot. Like many of Poul's longer stories, it's a
little more complicated than the story requires. In some cases, that improves
the book, and in others it doesn't. In this case, it helps fill the space
between the covers, which is all right. Publishers have their needs, too. It's
about the Mississippi Valley and the rest of the world about five or ten
thousand years into a new ice age, hence the title. It involves an empire out of
Texas in northern New Mexico whose name is spelled R-A-H-I-accent-D, and I don't
know whether to pronounce it Ra-Ed or Ra-H-I. As I say, Poul is a thoughtful
man, and being a very domesticated man, he's undoubtedly writing his yearnings,
which he shares with most of us, when he explores the gulf between wild and
domesticated animals. And remember, domesticated doesn't necessarily mean tame.
There's a saying that in the Galapagos Islands, the wild animals are tame and
the tame animals are wild. If you want me to, I'll explain that. Poul's explored
the question before in a shorter Van Rijn story, saying that of two groups of
aliens, one was domesticated and the other was wild animals. And Van Rijn
pointed out that most of us are domesticated, but he and his group are wild
animals. similar considerations are given in this book in an evolutionary point
of view and he has one thing right evolutionary change always starts with a
change of behaviour that is of habits and ecology but i don't like his
terminology for his aliens in the benrhein story there wasn't enough information
but for people like benrhein and like the rogovicki in the winter of the world
we have very precise other terms which are better Wild animals are stocks which
have never been domesticated. Animals which have had domesticated ancestors but
are not now under domestication have very characteristic features, unlike true
wild animals. We say they have gone wild, and the technical term is feral. Both
the Van Rijn pack and the Rogoviki are described as feral. They are also
described as pack predators, as opposed to being herd animals. By and large,
pack predators operate from a home base, but are not truly territorial in the
sense of fixed boundaries to their reign. For the little man's meeting of
Friday, November 26, 1976, I gave a very short talk on the social science in
science fiction. Of course, the first thing I did was to say it wasn't going to
be limited to that. I told them that I had told Richard the leader of the
meeting that I would say something on that subject, but when I started working
on it I realized first that I would be more comfortable calling it science and
behavioral sciences and science fiction because anthropology is both, and
anthropology is how I think. Then second I realized that they are just not time
for an organized presentation, so So I said I will refer you to Pamela Sargent's
Introduction to Women of Wonder for a very good and very well organized
presentation in one aspect of the field, which only has to be paraphrased to
apply to several other aspects. I'll make some remarks about how the
relationships are in general, not a review of specific stories, then I hope
you'll all have questions to ask after I've said this. Actually, they did not
have very many questions to ask. I think they were too anxious to go and
socialize at the club they go to after meetings. So, I went on to say, by the
standards of today, social and behavioral sciences are important in science
fiction. Of course, they were always important, in that the way they were
handled or not handled made the difference between a good story and a not-so
-good story. Such elements are usually referred to as background, and character
development, and plot handling, or plot the luck, and various other aspects of
storytelling itself. And they were what makes 20,000 Leagues Under the Sea a
supreme masterpiece, and Mysterious Island, its sequel, just a moderately good
adventure to it. John Campbell is often given credit for introducing them into
science fiction, but they were certainly present in Food of the Gods and Tars
Tarkas' Revolution, Antharchian Morals, to say nothing of Ralph 1. Du Forseffro
and Blish. The reason Campbell gets such credit is mostly because so many writers
remember that Campbell was paying a cent a word and sometimes two cents for stories
which had some of these features, while Fred Pohl and his fellow unfortunates on
other pulps were paying from a fifth to half a cent for stories that didn't.
What they don't stop to think about is that Campbell knew about these things
because Harry Bates, paying two cents a word, and F. Orland Tremaine paying one
cent, had previously demanded it of Campbell. You may object that most of John
Campbell Jr.'s own stories didn't have much in the way of character development,
but each of them did have something in the field of social or behavioral
science, even if social and behavioral scientists might disagree with what he
did. The readers didn't want any better. As a matter of fact, they mostly agreed
with him. The difference now is that with people like Ursula Le Guin and
McCaffrey writing, the standards for treatment of social and behavioral sciences
and science fiction should now be at a higher level than the personal prejudices
of John Campbell and Ben Bova, or, for that matter, Jerry Pournelle. There are
certain things we do know about people. We know that people tend to act in what
they consider to be their own best interests. And we know that this includes
being able afterwards to live with their consciences. We know that people tend
to want to reciprocate what they get from others. This includes revenge as much
as it includes paying other obligations. We know that, on the other hand, that
people tend to want to take things which are denied to them, but that they can
be taught not to do this. We know that some people are capable of great cruelty
to others, and that other people raised in much the same cultures do not approve
of this. There are many different kinds of behavior which anthropologists refer
to as war, but some peoples do not have any such behaviors, and many people
refuse to take part in them. Many people write and talk about aggressive drives,
but one thing we do know is that aggression is not a separate drive, but that
the word is a cover term for various behaviors engaged in for various reasons
when, but not always when, any drive or desire is interfered with it. We also
know that such aggressive urge can be inhibited and then may or may not turn
against other targets, from the person himself to perfect strangers seen only at
a distance. People who live in excessively polite cultures tend to be
excessively vicious in wars or in personal killings. We know that the basic
relationships between people are power-mediated relationships, and that power,
and hence aggressiveness, is behavior related to control of access to resources.
We know that dominance and submission are power relations and hence also involve
such control and lack of control, but that also dominance is itself a very
prized resource, since a resource is anything anyone needs or wants or can be
fond into thinking he should try for. The various commodities, for instance,
which are offered by those who conduct our practices of religion, are at times,
and for many people, very valuable resources. Information is a most important
resource, and those who control access to it can be very powerful. It should be
noted that often, the actual practitioners in its supply do not control either
the access or the supply. In our culture, this is what advertising and
publishing are concerned with. Because social relationships are power
relationships, and the resources required and available depend on the
technology, and not only the technological level, but the technological biases
of the states of the arts, technology is very important to social organization.
However, rapid technological change may not bring social changes so rapidly. The
various fascist movements, for instance were efforts to reestablish feudal
social relationships in a period of industrial capitalism And as Milavon Giles
pointed out in the book that got him in jail the first time the communist and
socialist revolutions were efforts to establish industrial technology in
countries whose prevailing social structures were still feudal and colonial For
these reasons, plus those mentioned by James Gunn in This Fortress World I'm
very leery of stellar empires, though Van Vogt had a rather plausible
possibility in the weapons shop universe. Doc Smith's civilization is even more
convincing. As to Blish's fascist future, and I've already mentioned why not,
the substrate culture is now gone. To make a good story, you have to create
tensions in the reader. Violence is a most inadequate way to do this, and
besides, it creates in the reader or viewer the erroneous belief that violence
is fun and that violence solves problems. Also, as Ben Bovo points out in Notes
to a science fiction writer, slam-bang action is not what we mean by conflict.
In science fiction, the main conflicts, that is to say, the tension-producing
situations, are simply culture shock and future shock, especially the
explorations of extrapolations like Age Gold encourages writers to do for Galaxy
and the various worlds created, for instance, by Ursula Le Guin. These are
wholly social and behavioral problems within the spectator himself being
operated upon by what he sees in the story. One thing I liked very much about
John Campbell's A Post to Stories was his violation of one rule of American
storytelling. Our culture places great emphasis on failure. The object of
competition and testing is not to produce winners, is to produce losers. And
thus, a general rule of our fiction is that a protagonist has to go through a
cycle of degradation. He's not allowed to win until he's had a few failures.
John Campbell wasn't interested in this. He was interested in winners. His writers
couldn't always go along with him, so he printed a lot of degradation cycle
stories, but he didn't insist on it as most editors do. Anthropology is the
social and behavioral science that deals with groups of people. but that still
deals with them not only as people, but as whole human beings. That is why the
very best science fiction has a lot of ethnography in it, because ethnography is
the branch of anthropology which deals with societies and cultures as the
beliefs and activities of individual human beings living together as organized
groups. Doc Smith was a master at this, and he did it so well that most people
don't realize he was doing it. Naturally, there's lots more I could say. but
some of you may have questions, and the rest of you probably want to get out of
here. They did. Also at that time, I prepared a comment on the election debates
for my anthropology classes. In the first debate, I told them, Mr. Ford charged
that Jimmy Carter's successor, the present governor of Georgia, had told Ford
that the Medicare setup in Georgia was a shambles, and that therefore Carter
wasn't much of an administrator. The poor klutz didn't even realize that
Medicare is a federal program and that it's a scandal all over the United States
and that the governor was not complaining about Carter as an administrator, but
about Ford. The governor, that is, the current governor of Georgia, did try to
set the record straight the next day, but it got very brief mention in the media
and hasn't been picked up by the Carter campaign either. Carter, on the other
hand, noted the need for a national health program and that there were poor
people he knows in his plains who had very great difficulty getting any medical
care. but carter did not it would never occur to him to realize there might be
an intimate relationship between the poverty of those friends of his and the
fact that the carter family owns five and a half billion dollars worth of
property and business none of which could exist without the presence of a
reservoir of low paid mostly seasonal rural labor the whole little agribusiness
setup he has is completely dependent on him if they were his slaves he would
recognize his need responsibility and would have health care for them just as he
has mechanics for his machinery and calls them veterinarians for his livestock.
But for over a century, no one has admitted that there is slavery in America, so
his responsibility is reduced to a tug at his heartstrings and an effort to
shift the burden from the county hospital and the local property tax to the
federal government, so we can have a Medicare shambles for everyone and not just
for folks who were over 65, who have Social Security. Now that, of course, doesn't
at first glance look like science fiction, but at least, it's a footnote in
preparation for reading some, say, of James Gunn's medical future. In her
excellent introduction to Women of Wonder, Pamela Sargent writes on pages is
small Roman numerals 32 to 34, a footnote, mostly concerning quotations from
Stanislaus Lem and Ursula Le Guin, largely also concerning the status of the
men, women, and the people of winter.
i wrote to pamela sergeant and to ursula le guin about this i'll quote from the
letter to ursula le guin While reading his remarks, and before I got to yours, I
was thinking how he fit my stereotypes for his sex-cultural psychology as a
Central European man. Then, when he threw in the observation that, quote,
cultural psychological conditioning, unquote, was more powerful in biological
minds, with the insistence that the conditioning must necessarily be the same in
Karhide as in Poland, despite his later statement of the contrary. My
stereotype? Well, I was thinking that you, as a woman, even here in the free
world, had been writing of the Cithinian cycle as liberating from the tyranny of
sex roles, while Lem, as a Central European male, was responding that it made for
intolerable uncertainty. Obviously, at least for them, Polish dialectics has not
yet achieved the Marxian ideal of abolishing the contradiction between male and
female roles, and not even the general uncertainties which are part of life in
patron-appliant societies. Or had you heard of George Foster's development of
Konigman's image of the limited good, which actually is a special case of the
principle of fixed available amounts.
About what one wears in 20 Below Wins. steyfenson said how come he got so much
credit for the few winters he spent in the arctic and none for the twenty-odd he
spent in north dakota and he never saw any weather in the arctic to max that in
dakota well how did one handle skirts in indian women wore rawhide skirts, very
heavy. white culture had cloth skirts, and they wore pants under them, winter
woolies and cotton or linen bloomers, but it was the skirts and underskirts that
showed, the latter mainly by bulk. i have often wanted to write to you to tell
you my opinion which i have expressed to many others, that you know much more
about people than your father did, and quite likely more about peoples. I do not
know how he was at home, but around the department he was the living embodiment
of his thesis that culture operates people rather than the other way around. He
was very much the professor and very much the head of the department, but still
at times the vivid, vital individual would show through and we could see what
status and role were being separately from the man. Odd that he and Murdoch and
White, the three who most thought that the individual who is hopeless in the
hands of culture, that they probably more than any others of their generation
influenced and molded the culture of American anthropology. But I wander. I have
one more comment on your comments. You asked about a neuter or a non-committal
pronoun. If anyone believes that English lacks such a pronoun, then they have
forgotten how much effort their parents and teachers expended to stop them from
saying they in the singular and speaking of winter I hope i will be seeing you
at Vancouver next summer well she wrote back saying that lem was very charming
in his letters but that what most people didn't realize about that that he plays
the european scholarly game
I thanked her for confirming my judgment of Lem. He is right in the stream of
Central European society. Because The Bad-Mannad Arrogant, that is, Patronizing,
European scholarly game is not a game at all. It's deadly serious. And I do mean
life and death. It's a client making and patron refusing behavior. The private
charmingness is at home there too. It's appropriate for client-keeping and for
addressing an equal whom one doesn't wish to have respond in the client-making,
patron-refusing style. And it's also appropriate to use to someone who really is
a patron grade over you. I reported this at a little men's meeting, and I added
to them, You remember what I said about excessively polite cultures being very
vicious in war or feud? Well, this is a sample. later in that meeting the
regular speaker for the meeting was a man who had engaged in contract physics in
Europe and in America and he commented on the cutthroat nature of the people in
academia and also in industrial jobs in nuclear physics and other kinds of
physics and the expressions and descriptions that he used in speaking of this
were very much in line with what I just said about the scholarly game. In fact,
I caught his eye and he grinned back at me.
I also just ran across a note which is dated the 1st of March 1970 which I
discussed with Poul at a little man's meeting soon after. In the prefatory note
to the story of the three-cornered wheel in his book, The Trouble Twisters, he
quoted a Vance Hall that, and the quotation is, man, the child of earth, lives
by certain principles which are immutable, end quote. These are there given as
Parkinson's First and Second Laws, Sturgeon's Revelation, Murphy's Law, and a
fourth law of thermodynamics. This latter, in my estimation, is merely a way of
stating the law of entropy. And it seems also that Parkinson's first law only
applies to humans within the orbit of civilization. That law, for folks touched
by civilization, which is to say affected by exploitation, and the others, in
some degree for all folk, are human ways of making entropy, but they're far from
being immutable. They're highly variable, both in degree and in manifestation,
though they do touch most of the laws for all people, and Parkinson's first law
only for those in civilization. Two years ago at Oakland, and i understand some
other cons around that time there was a panel of writers talking about the
military mind and how misunderstood it was by many people
um it occurred to me that it was possible there might be such a panel at
vancouver so I wrote to them and said that it was almost impossible to answer
these people from the floor but if there was such a panel I would like to be on
it so I could give some words of true wisdom from the table instead of fighting
for a spot from the floor well I haven't heard from them so I don't think that I
will be on any such panel but I did prepare some remarks.
After all, I didn't know how much time I would have so I boiled my absolutely
minimal essential presentation of about 4 hours. I boiled down to about 5
minutes and 10 seconds.
I was going to start with a reference to the West Coast maneuvers of July 1941,
before the United States was officially in World War II. There were two armies,
one of regular Army units and one of former National Guard outfits, with the
rules made so the regulars couldn't possibly lose. They were losing, so the
rules were changed to favor them still more. And again. Finally, the whole thing
was called off a week early, just before the final debacle. You see, all during
peacetime, the War College keeps the regular Army officers trained about what to
do when war comes. The National Guard officers get some of this, but they don't
take it all that seriously, because they have to spend most of their time living
in the real world, something the regular officers don't know much about. There
was one guy in my regiment who did take it seriously. the security officer. The
others didn't take him seriously, but they should have. He was what it was all
about. Well, we're right. We do make cracks about the military in Martin. And we
don't see that much difference between military occupation troops in so-called
peace and the conquest troops in war. Oh, the bodies are prettier. They shave
and bathe more often. in almost all societies the organization of fighters for
war parallels that of men's work groups in fact they often have the same
personnel but in our society and I include here the Soviets the organization of
the military is like the social organization which preceded ours the kind of
society we refer to as feudal or semi-feudal the peasant-based societies
organized into patron-cliant sets, where patrons are to make the decisions and
clients are first to be exploited and second to be hoarded. And to put up with
that, they have to be specially indoctrinated. As Auburn McDermott reminded us
from the audience at Oakland, four hundred years and more ago, the people did
not think the way we did. Our type of civilian mind was then just beginning to
rise to contest the hitherto unchallenged rule of the military mind. and then I
was going to ask if anyone in the audience knows the purpose of close order
drill the Russians once tried to abolish close order drill and they found that
they had no army L. Ron Hubbard who wrote Fear and Typewriter in the Sky and
that masterpiece Final Blackout and Ordok Methuselah stories was in the military
he was a navy commander and one of his basic teachings is that all authority
rests upon the ability to move people about physically in space. So, I was going
to say, I'll put this in terms that at least the Scientologists here will be
able to understand. Close order drill is an opening procedure drill to reduce
com lag between the time an order is received and the time it's carried out. So
I'll just go there, do that, stop it, do something else, go somewhere else. You
see the close order drill and you see the opening procedure drill. It's simply
to condition you to take orders without stopping to think about it. The
difference is that Scientology later teaches you how to make up your own orders
and give them to yourself. And the military never willingly lets you go. You
wind up being a wind-up toy. Programmed to their ideas. and you start wondering
why these crazy civilians won't just bend over and do what you think they
should. And that is why we make such remarks about the military mind. Now, I
could go on with this, but I'll sum it up. The purpose of the military is not to
die for one's country. It's not even to make the enemy die for his country. It
is to make the enemy live for one's own country. That means to destroy the enemy
as an independent organization. In other words, the purpose of the military is
conquest, which is to say, the increase of one's own client's set and its
perpetuation. And if you want a course in the anthropology of peasant base,
military administered patron client societies, I'll be around.
So, it occurs to me that some of the people on that panel awed me. I wasn't used
to the helpless inadequate feeling I got when I heard them on this subject. The
nearest I can recall is the way I used to feel around a certain corporal soon
after I was first drafted into the U.S. Army. And since it's an example that
shows the nature of some aspects of this particular military mind, let me tell
you. He was a little big for his age So he lied about his years and joined the
National Guard when he was in high school And they double-crossed him and
started getting ready for war His outfit had been activated in October 1940 So
by the time I was drafted in February 1941 He already had four months of a
nasty, muddy Puget Sound winter under his bed They'd gotten some training
between raindrops and now they were a training cadre and he was a corporal and
they were supposed to pass what they'd found on gas. Well, nothing's perfect so
now and then I'd have to ask a question and even very seldom make a suggestion
like, if we're going to be digging all these holes wouldn't it make sense first
to set aside the turf from where the hole and the pile of dirt are going to be
and then afterward lay it over the dirt so it won't be quite so obvious just
where the holes are? You know, I wasn't trying to show up to the trainers. It's
just that I wanted my fellow draftees to have at least a minimum chance of
survival if it came to that. Besides, I'm selfish, and the more survivor types I
have around me, the better chance I have of surviving among them. Well, this
corporal was one of the snottiest of snot-willed kids. You understand, he wasn't
dumb. He really had great potential. It's just that he thought he was already
there. He was on the same floor of the same barracks as the squad I was in.
Thank God he wasn't my corporal. I had a real good corporal. I really loved
having that. But the kid embarked on a real deliberate campaign to humiliate me.
Well, I was living it. Only one day I was over in the rec room writing a letter.
Naturally, I got a table as far back as possible along one wall so I could see
everything, especially who came in and went out the door. Then a bunch of kids
came in, including the corporals. They had an older sergeant with me. He was
from another outfit, and I'd never seen him before, but I noticed they held him
in very hard regard, and he had a forest green braid on his sleeve, which meant
that in a previous military incarnation he'd been an officer. They took seats in
the corner behind me, and I wasn't paying any attention, after all it was none
of my goodness, but suddenly the corporal's voice rose above the level of the
conversation, and he said, The worst kind of bullet is ricochet. Ricochet. You
know. Whang! Well, I don't know what possessed me to butt in, but I turned
around and said, The worst kind of bullet is a spent bullet. It drifts along.
Hunting. The sergeant got very excited. He said, You've been in action. Where
were you? And I said, Hmm? You were in action. Where was it? And just about the
time I began to get back control of my lower jaw, the corporal began to realize
what was happening, and he lost control of his.
Well, I wish I could say that after that he was a changed character, but he
wasn't. It's just that he was no longer carrying on a deliberate campaign. But
you see what I mean about a hopeless, helpless inadequacy. How do you educate
brilliant but ignorant people who already know everything? Now I want you to
understand though That the corporal's attitude Was completely characteristic of
the military mind And it's documented by numerous studies Of patron client
societies It's especially found in situations Where the respective ranks Do not
very much differ People who are clearly of patron grade Have much more effective
ways To keep clients aware of the fact People with just a little authority Have
to keep fighting for it and the methods they use are born of desperation. The
fact that I didn't want his job was immaterial. I was obviously going to be one
of the first new TFCs, and he was the youngest old corporal. To the militarized
mind, he was in dire danger.
I was also hoping that someone would pick up on that remark I made about the
security officer being what it was all about, and would ask me from the audience
what I meant. I had an answer to that, too. The answer is this. You've heard it
said that our army is always ready for the last previous war it was in. In 1941,
we were going to fight against Hitler's conquest of the German people and in
France and the Low Countries and Norway, also against the Japanese conquests and
those of Mussolini. The last war our military was in at that time had not been
against Germany in World War I, but the interventions through Archangel and
Vladivostok and in the Baltic States, and they've never forgiven the rest of us
for the war we actually had them fight in the 1940s.
I understand that the Oro History Association itself grew out of the meaning of
Lloyd Biggle's Fred Pohl, in which Fred Pohl said he'd heard from me. The letter
I wrote him was a result of his statement on page two of the early poll that in
March of 1933 fandom didn't exist. I wrote variants of it to the three main pro
-mags. It never surfaced in Amazing, even though it contained a leader
commenting on the 50th anniversary issue and how Amazing under Gernsbeck had
actually spawned the very first fan org. Ben Bova returned a postcard saying,
That's fandom. And here at Analog, we don't get into fandom. Galaxy, which does
get into fandom, also sank the letter without trace. Then I wrote Al Gore in
direct reply to their having reprinted the statement by full, and I've been told
they printed the letter, but I haven't seen that issue. Jonesback ran quite a
letter column and printed the addresses in full, so from almost the first there
was some correspondence between the readers. Finally, Ray Palmer organized it.
He seems to have written to everyone whose address had appeared. The result was
the Science Correspondents Club. The magazine began in 1926. The club may have
started as early as 1928 or as late as 1929. I'm sure it was not as early as
1927. The name was later changed to International Scientific Association. Then
one summer day, I answered a ring at our door, and a tall, dark, young man asked
if my brother was older. Well, I had three brothers, but I assumed he meant the
older. Turned out that's what he assumed, too. You mean Alan, I asked? No, he
said, Hufton. It was Auburn McKibben. The next one he contacted was Lester
Anderson in Hayward. We formed the East Bay Scientific Association, and the name
would never change, even after we had members in San Francisco. I know it lasted
until at least 1935, and maybe later. Aubrey says it must have been started in
1928, because he has something about it in my handwriting, dated 1928, and it
now. I know it had to be after the parent organization became International
Scientific Association, because we copied that name. I'm also very sure it had
to be 1930, because I recall it was just after I'd come home after shipping on
the tanker district of Columbia, and enrolled in the University of California
summer session, and that was 1930. After the international organization was
founded, Gernsbeck had one of his cover picture story contests. I think it was
the first one, maybe the only one from Amazing. I toyed with trying to write a
story to enter, but Ray Palmer wrote one and won. I believe the prize money was
$100. He used it to buy the organization a mimeograph and put out a club or a
cosmology. You could get quite a mimeograph for $100 in those days. Anyway, from
then on, the president was also editor. By 1932, Aubrey was president and
editor, and I was secretary and assistant editor. In passing through two or
three hands, something had happened to the mimeograph. What we'd received from
past President Eaton in Atlanta was not a machine. Eaton swore it was just what
he had received from his predecessor. The mimeograph drum was flattened out to
about a quarter circle, a flat deck was laid over it, and a handle put in the
middle of the deck. This you held and leaned on while rolling the drum and
stencil the length of the sheet of paper. I've seen them since for postcard
size, but that's the only one I ever saw for eight-and-a-half-by-eleven paper. I
saw quite too much of it. Aubrey saw more. I left in August 1932 to go to be
graduate assistant in anthropology at the University of Nebraska. I stopped to
see some members in Oregon and Washington and hitchhiked to Milwaukee where I
made the same mistake with Ray that Aubrey made with me. The first thought I had
when he opened the door was, my gosh, he didn't tell me his younger brother was
hunchbacked too. All the time I was there, Ray was warning me about the people
I'd be staying with in Chicago. Walter Dennis was founder and president of the
Chicago Club. Ray had visited and told me, Dennis' mother was German and said,
Great store of good food and would keep insisting I have more at meals and
forcing it on me. Actually, I didn't see anything unusual, and nobody forced
anything on me. The Chicago club was actually not very active fannishly. They
had founded an astronomy club based on the then quite new Adler Planetarium, and
the astronomy club had sort of swallowed the fan club. Ray had also mentioned
our one member In Lincoln where I was going It was one of our few girl or young
woman Members and it seemed some of Ray's Letters had been rather glowing
Incidentally just as I Always sign my name C-H-A Small letter H and small letter
A Ray always used Rap Small A and small P I think we both started that Before
either of us wrote to the other I asked my lift into Lincoln how to get to the
fan's address. Why, that sounds like it's down in Russian town, he said, making
it plain no one would want to go or know anyone down there. It seemed everyone
down there spoke German. As a matter of fact, there were in that part of town
many people from Russia being volt of Germans, like many of the loggers on the
northern California and the vecino coast, who were Russian Finns. Well, I found
the place. It wasn't well. It seems she was recently married, and her husband
had seen at least one of Ray's letters. Ray had known it, as she had written to
ask him not to send any more. I can't recall whether I shaved off my beard at
Milwaukee or after I got to Lincoln. Dr. Myles J. Brewer also lived at Lincoln.
His office was in the building a block and a half from where I got a room. I
never did see it. His receptionist evidently didn't approve of science fiction
and let me know I was unwelcome.
Christmas vacation, I went to Boston to visit the other local fan club We
believe that it was older than the Chicago one But probably not as old as East
Bay At some time, briefly, there seems to have been one in New York City But
just when, I don't know Maybe Kanye Ruppert might know He put out Science
Fiction Digest And I spent a couple of days with him He lived in South Ozone
Park then In one of those hyphenated Queen's addresses a lot of others around
Boston I visited as I recall one of the Oregon members named Ockerman possibly
with two N's who was going to MIT he was in nuclear chemistry there were very
few of them now I guess they're all absorbed into nuclear physics that winter or
the next one at I believe Washington University near St. Louis L. Ron Hubbard
and John Campbell Jr. were taking the very first class ever given called nuclear
physics During his Dianetics period Campbell announced that he had discovered that
ontogeny recapitulates phylogeny was a very important engrammic phrase behind
his mind and he couldn't understand why it should be so strong in the mind of a
physical scientist Then he remembered that he grew up in the household of a
biologist But he seems never to have made the connection between the above facts
and his lifelong dedication to the proposition many cultural phenomena are of
genetic origin Incidentally, the weather that winter was very cold and deep
snows hit just before I started. I couldn't hitchhike. I went by freight to
Elizabeth, New Jersey and by a bus from New York City to Boston and back, then
freight's back to Lincoln. After that storm, Ray wrote, the east wind blew off
the frozen lake and made it even colder in Milwaukee. He took pitchers of hot
water to the second floor window, poured them out in front of people coming
along. The outside of the water would freeze on the way down, shatter against
the wall, and a cloud of steam would rise up in front of him. On the other hand,
how much of that ray wrote me as true is questionable. Other people say he wrote
them different accounts of his life at that time. To change the subject
completely, Spider Robinson's recent column on Books by Women inspired me to
write him quite a letter. one of the points I made to him was that I couldn't
understand why it took him so long to accumulate all those books because most of
them were old books. Even considering how long it takes to get something
published in amazing.
However, since I wrote him the letter, I've been thinking more about women
writers of science fiction. And it's true. there have always been women writers
of science fiction there have always been very good women writers of science
fiction the point is there have not been the cloud of mediocre women science
fiction writers as there has been a cloud of mediocre men science fiction
writers regardless of whether they use their own names or their initials or a
fake name, still,
for a woman to break into science fiction writing, she had to be real good. And
then, of course, there's the recent June 1977 women's issue of Analog. He said,
Ben Bova said, that he could not get women artists. it's very strange at the
same time this thing was on the stands there was an issue of Galaxy on the
stands with a cover and interior work by Bonnie Dalzell and oddly enough her
work for that galaxy was very very similar to the cover art and inside work that
appeared by a man on the women's issue of Analog totally unlike other, and to my
eyes better, work by Bonnie Dalzell. And by the way, did you see the AP wire
photo of the Prudhoe Bay control room for the Alaska Pipeline? I swear, those
two hard hats sitting there are aliens, or maybe one of them is only half-alien.
The names are Margis, M-A-R-G-I-S, Freichtl. F-R-E-I-C-H-T-L. And the other one
is named Dave Funtempt. F-U-N-T-E-M-P-T. Surely those are not Earth names. Maybe
they were devised by Jack Vance. Maybe.